---
layout: post
title: "TTY Space Program. Part 1"
date: 2026-05-16
tags:
  - tsp
---

In one winter evening I watched some youtube and noticed a community of developers, whose developing games and TUI apps in Bash. That sounds weird at first. Before that for TUI I would use Go or Rust, but definitely not Bash.

But that's strange. Bash is a language of most modern terminals. In fact, terminal is REPL for Bash. Then why not?

### idea

I really like Kerbal Space Program. That's an awesome game and I really recommend everyone to try it. Once in uni I was excited about everything related to space, so I wanted to use that knowledge in this new project.

The idea of project is simple. We have a rocket (and allow user to select it in start menu). Then we act a pilot in 2D world and trying to reach the Earth orbit with it. Maybe fly to other planets.

But also, there's some restrictions

1. It should be portable. It should run on every unix terminal with bash support. At least on GNU/Linux, Mac and Android emulator.
2. You can run it with one line command. Kinda `curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/... | bash`
3. As few dependencies as possible. Also, for portability. Just pure Bash, ASCII and POSIX tools

### basics

First of all, I need to know the size of the terminal to adjust the picture.

{% highlight bash  %}
COLS=$(tput cols)
LINES=$(tput lines)
{% endhighlight %}

Yeah, I know, tput doesn't have this operand in POSIX. Then I need some replacement for it. Thanks [@bahamas10](https://github.com/bahamas10/bash-tput) I don't need to invent it.

Next, I need to have at least 2 threads. First - for control flow, second - for rendering. Maybe third for calculations, but at this point I'm not that sure.

Control thread will communicate with rendering using `fifo` in `/tmp` directory. And also some sort of shared memory location to exchange the information.

{% highlight bash  %}
# run rendering
render &
RENDERING_PID=$!

SHMID=$(cat /dev/urandom | LC_ALL=C tr -dc 'a-zA-Z0-9' | head -c 64; echo)
SHM=$([[ "$(uname -s)" == 'Darwin' ]] && echo "/tmp/$SHMID" || echo "/dev/shm/$SHMID")
CPIPE="/tmp/$SHMID.fifo"
if [[ ! -p $CPIPE ]]; then
    mkfifo "$CPIPE"
fi
{% endhighlight %}

Unfortunately, Darwin doesn't have /dev/shm feature. Unfortunately...

Of course I will need to clean after myself, so let's implement it

{% highlight bash  %}
cleanup() {
    if [[ -n $RENDERING_PID ]]; then
        kill "$RENDERING_PID"
    fi
    rm "$SHM"
    rm "$CPIPE"
}

trap cleanup exit
{% endhighlight %}

And one thing left. Since `(( ))` construction in Bash can't calculate floats properly, I need to find a way to do it in runtime. The only suitable way I found was awk. I would be glad to hear that I wrong and pure Bash can do float math...

{% highlight bash  %}
calc_d() {
    local expr=${1:-0}
    awk "BEGIN {printf \"%d\n\", $expr }"
}
{% endhighlight %}

I think that's it. We can start actual programming.

### control flow

As I said earlier, I'm going to separate control from rendering. Control flow will be infinite loop, e.g. `while true` with input mapping.

{% highlight bash  %}
    local escape_char=$'\u1b'
    while :; do
        local input=
        read -rsn1 input < /dev/tty 2>/dev/null
        if [[ $input == "$escape_char" ]]; then
            read -rsn2 input < /dev/tty 2>/dev/null
        fi

        case "$input" in
            # key up
            'A' | '[A' | k | w)
                # send command to render process

            # key down
            'B' | '[B' | j | s)
                # send command to render process

            # key left
            'D' | '[D' | h | a)
                # send command to render process

            # key right
            'C' | '[C' | l | d)
                # send command to render process

            # key enter
            '')
                # send command to render process

            # ignore everything else
            *) continue;;
        esac
{% endhighlight %}

The only concern I have - what if user will press buttons more often than Bash can handle it. That's not something I would fix right now, but such possibility exists.

### rendering

The rendering is quite straightforward. We simply use printf with predefined multiline string. The only issue I had is how to draw a dynamic-length line as a surface in main menu. Came up with a weird solution, but it works

{% highlight bash  %}
SUFRACE_BLOCK="
<b1>
<b2>
"

repeat() {
    local times=$1
    local text=$2
    for _ in $(seq "$times"); do echo -n "$text"; done
}

tput cup $(calc_d "$lines / 1.1") 0
local f=$SURFACE_BLOCK
f=${f//<b1>/$(repeat $cols '_')}
f=${f//<b2>/$(repeat $cols '/')}
printf "$f"
{% endhighlight %}

### what is next

For now that's it. I'm still working on it and start to work with the most interesting part: launch and physics itself. I will keep posting updates in the next chapter.
For now you can see the full code [here](https://github.com/pasha1980/tsp/blob/41e5fb9e57dc392ddee4142523e8b57a55fbaa80/tsp)
